.TH CUID2GEN 1 "2025-12-20" "libcuid2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cuid2gen \- generate collision-resistant CUID2 identifiers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cuid2gen
[\fB\-l\fR|\fB\-\-length\fR \fInum\fR]
.br
.B cuid2gen
\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cuid2gen
generates collision-resistant, sortable unique identifiers using the CUID2 algorithm.
CUID2 identifiers are created by combining cryptographic primitives including:
.IP \(bu 2
Timestamp (Unix epoch) for sortability
.IP \(bu
Thread-safe atomic counter
.IP \(bu
System fingerprint (hostname + process ID + environment variables)
.IP \(bu
Cryptographically secure random bytes
.IP \(bu
Random prefix character (a-z)
.PP
These inputs are hashed using NIST FIPS-202 SHA3-512 and encoded as base-36 strings.
The output is suitable for use as database primary keys, distributed system identifiers,
or anywhere collision-resistant unique identifiers are needed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-length " \fInum\fR"
Specify the length of the generated identifier in characters.
Valid range is 4 to 32 characters.
Default is 24 characters.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Generate a default length (24 character) CUID2:
.RS
.nf
$ cuid2gen
wvxj8kfyo9kj8kfyo9kj8kfy
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate a 16-character CUID2:
.RS
.nf
$ cuid2gen -l 16
k2p9xa7r2p9xa7r2
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate a maximum length (32 character) CUID2:
.RS
.nf
$ cuid2gen --length 32
m3k9xa7r2p9xa7r2p9xa7r2p9xa7r2p
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use in shell scripts:
.RS
.nf
#!/bin/bash
user_id=$(cuid2gen)
echo "Created user: $user_id"
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. A CUID2 identifier was generated and written to stdout.
.TP
.B 1
Failure. An error occurred (invalid arguments, generation failure, etc.).
Error messages are written to stderr.
.SH NOTES
CUID2 identifiers generated by this tool are:
.IP \(bu 2
.B Collision-resistant:
Cryptographically secure random bytes make collisions extremely unlikely
.IP \(bu
.B Sortable:
Lexicographic ordering matches temporal ordering (newest identifiers sort last)
.IP \(bu
.B URL-safe:
Uses only alphanumeric characters (base-36: 0-9, a-z)
.IP \(bu
.B Non-sequential:
Cannot be enumerated or predicted from previous values
.IP \(bu
.B Distributed-friendly:
Safe to generate on multiple machines without coordination
.PP
The implementation uses NIST FIPS-202 SHA3-512 hashing via OpenSSL 3.x,
which is FIPS 140-3 validated.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR uuidgen (1),
.BR openssl (1)
.PP
CUID2 specification: https://github.com/paralleldrive/cuid2
.PP
NIST FIPS-202 (SHA-3): https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/202/final
.SH AUTHOR
Part of the libcuid2 project, a C++ port of the CUID2 identifier generation library.
.SH COPYRIGHT
See the LICENSE file in the libcuid2 source distribution for license information.
